good evening everyone and welcome
thank you so much for tuning in tonight
my name is kate bruns and on behalf of
harvard bookstore
the harvard university division of
science and the harvard library
i am so pleased to welcome you to this
evening's event
with you and angus ashley discussing his
new book
the genome odyssey medical mysteries and
the incredible quest
to solve them in conversation tonight
with siddhartha mukherjee
tonight's lecture is part of our harvard
science book talk series
which brings the authors of recently
published science-related literature to
our cambridge community
and now beyond coming up this month we
will be hosting events with nobel prize
winning biologist
paul nurse and nobel prize-winning
physicist
steven weinberg to learn more about the
science book talks you can visit the
webpage
harvard.com science or sign up for the
bookstore's email newsletter at
harvard.com
we also have a youtube page where you
can view previous talks you might have
missed
i will post links in the zoom chat for
those in just a few minutes
this evening's talk is going to conclude
with some time for your questions
if you would like to ask our speakers
anything please go to the q
a chat at the bottom of the screen where
you can submit a question
we're going to get through as many as
time allows for this evening
i would also just like to say a
tremendous thank you for your patronage
during these
strange virtual times your support makes
this author series possible
and really does ensure the future of a
landmark independent bookstore
so thank you to our partners at harvard
university and thank you to all of you
for tuning in and showing up for our
authors indie book selling
and especially for science and finally
as you may have experienced in virtual
gatherings technical issues may arise
and if they do i'm going to do my best
to resolve them quickly so thank you for
your patience and understanding
and now i am honored to introduce
tonight's speakers
professor of medicine and genetics and
associate dean at stanford university
you and angus ashley is renowned for his
contributions
to genomic and precision medicine on the
stanford faculty
dr ashley led the team that carried out
the first clinical interpretation of a
human genome
today he directs the clinical genome
program and the center for inherited
cardiovascular
disease at stanford hospital where
genome sequencing
is routinely used in patient diagnoses
now
his award-winning work has been
recognized by the obama
white house and the national institutes
of health and has earned
him the medal of honor from the american
heart association
joining him in conversation tonight is
celebrated writer
oncologist and researcher siddhartha
mukherjee
he is the author most recently of the
gene and intimate history
recognized as one of the most
influential books of 2016.
and he is the author of the emperor of
all maladies a biography of cancer
winner of the 2011 pulitzer prize for
general nonfiction
tonight they'll be discussing dr
ashley's brand new book the genome
odyssey
celebrated as quote destined to be a
landmark narrative in the canon of
modern science
of the book dr mukherjee writes dr
ashley one of the pioneers of gene
sequencing technologies
writes with authority elegance and
simplicity
to enable an in-depth understanding of
the most exciting scientific
developments of our times
every curious reader must read this book
we are so honored to host them for this
conversation tonight
so without further ado dr ashley and dr
mukherjee
the digital podium is yours
uh well hello and welcome um
welcome ewan and congratulations on your
book
um
so uh let's start with the um you know
just a little bit of introduction um
1990 was the official date
when the human genome project was
announced
and that brings us now to about
30 years give or take um
and that's been those have been landmark
30 years
so the the first human genome
um was sequenced at the cost of about
three or four billion dollars
um now you can sequence human genomes
not i would say the active parts of the
human genome the
exome um at for about i don't know a
thousand dollars
six hundred dollars seven hundred
dollars something like that um
so it's been a you know a a kind of
moore's law
kind of shift in um in in that
uh in that moment um so we
we are also standing so 30 years
from the origin of the human genome
project and of course
i can't help but remark that we're also
standing in the midst of a pandemic
where genomics sequencing of viral
genomes sequencing of viral strains
has led to a a completely new
understanding
of infectious disease so um somehow you
know both these are kind of landmark
moments
um and have really changed the way we
think about the world the way we think
about ourselves
and the way we think about our futures
but let me begin with you
personally um you and tell us what
prompted you to write this book what was
the
what was the inspiration and why did you
choose to write this book
well thanks first of all uh for for
being here for being a conversation with
me today yeah i
you know i came to science initially
because of books actually not so much
because of teachers in the end i had
great science teachers but at high
school i was reading
books by people like richard dawkins and
steve pinker and
jared diamond and those sorts of people
really were the ones that brought me
into science and so
i'd always admired that plus as i was in
medical school i really enjoyed
oliver sex and his work just tremendous
writing
and so at some level i i knew that i
might
want to try and write one day and and i
certainly spend my life as a doctor
inspired by these stories of these
incredible patients who go through just
amazing things so often with rare
diseases where they're on a long
medical journey and odyssey for
sometimes years going from doctor to
doctor to doctor and this just
was a very inspiring thing to watch and
so part of me really just wanted to tell
that story
um but also inspired by books like yours
you know
i i also understand how much of of a
narrative
sciences and that science is really a
team sport we work together and we spend
days and days going after a problem
weeks turn to months
eventually the problem cracks and moves
forward and it moves forward in
interesting ways and
and so my my thought was that it might
be interesting for others to read about
these scientific narratives the
excitement of the chase
as it were but to try and bring those to
human life
with the real stories of of my patients
and other patients that we came to know
so all of those things i think together
were what eventually
led me to to start but but uh i'd say
your your own writing and a tool the one
day were also both
very prominent in in the last kind of
decade of course
for all of us interested in really lucid
medical and scientific
narratives and so very inspirational to
be able to to pick those up and then
just to
try in my own modest way to contribute
something small to the
to the cannon well it's it's not small
it's a it's a big book and tell tell us
tell us about the uh writing
process for a doctor and um and you know
i'll certainly share my
observations but but you know you you
you play
three roles really in in this book right
so
on one hand you're the author um
on the on the other hand you're a doctor
and on the third you're a scientist or a
geneticist
um so you play three roles how
uh you know just to contrast uh
this with uh for instance oliver sacks
um
you know oliver who i knew uh quite well
didn't have that that third role because
you know genetics was just being born um
he would ask people he would ask his
patients questions about their
family history but the idea of of the
genome being a
a tool almost a medical tool a kind of i
would call it i would describe it as a
kind of
stethoscope um into into your
in into what lies deeply inside you um
didn't exist uh he you know and so many
cases
one wonders if if if those cases would
have been solved
using that that stethoscope which was
missing
in in medicine so tell us about how you
resolve
these three um roles
um you know doctor scientist and
and and author um and tell us a little
bit about writing
the writing as a process so you know the
book
you know goes this is is is a compendium
of stories they're kind of whodunits
um mysteries and and in in every case
you you
use the uh the genome as a kind of as i
said as a kind of
medical stethoscope which would not have
been available
um you know 10 or 15 years ago but is
available now
um how did you how did you go about
writing this did you write at night do
you write
when the stories came up did you
remember them
um what was the way how did you choose
these in particular
how did you do it yeah well no
so many things there i mean yeah
definitely think of the genome as
a molecular stethoscope first of all and
i think it would have been amazing
if oliver had access to that okay i
would kind of
only imagine the stories he might have
told with this tool
at his fingertips as well yeah for me i
think it started very practically
like for many of us uh when you have
downtime and just a little bit of space
which
in in a former world that we can barely
remember now was when we got on planes
and so i distinctly remember the first
time when i started writing
and the stories had been in my head for
some time some patients are they're so
memorable
uh that you carry these stories around
with you uh for years
in many cases and uh you know i i told
them to
to a variety of people at times
obviously
in an anonymous fashion so the idea of
potentially
going back to revisit with those
patients and really trying to dig into
their memories and mine
uh did it with my longtime colleague and
nurse partner in the clinic and we sort
of dug through our own memories to try
and
bring back the details and then yeah i
think with uh with the young family a
lot of writing happens either on a plane
or early in the morning
or late at night or sometimes you send
the family off
on a hike or something else and get a
get a few hours to
to just try to find time um you know i
think that the the inspiration of the
story and the drive to write it down is
where it begins
uh of course as i've learned uh it's a
long way
between just getting the words down on
the page and trying to put them into a
form that hopefully will
will be ingestible by people and
enjoyable
uh by people as well but yeah juggling
juggling those three things is
is not easy i think that to my current
work i'm a cardiologist
and at stanford and so my cl i have a
clinic every every week
and then three or four times a year i
also work in the critical care unit at
stanford so
i you know there's plenty of if you like
there's plenty of material for patient
stories so
it's almost like one day in the life on
a coronary care unit produces
three or four human stories that that
would be worth telling and
as you mentioned in the middle of the
pandemic it's almost like those are more
acute those human stories are even
closer up and made all the more
uh extreme perhaps because often the
families are not there until the very
last minute in many cases as has been
the case over this last year and
let's talk a little bit about let's
shift gears and talk a little bit about
the human genome and its odyssey
um and um tell us about
sort of what have we learned in the
you know the 30 years that have passed
um
or you know when when the human genome
was sequenced as you know it was a big
event uh
announced in the white house uh jointly
by uh by um francis collins and by
uh craig venter the president was there
and it was
you know it was considered a a kind of a
public
private uh victory although as you know
um very well that victory was tinged by
a public private competition that went
that that that preceded it
uh but in the end a kind of compromise
was reached
in which uh the you know the public and
private um
attempts to sequence the human genome
were announced jointly and
out came a string of three billion
letters
in ac tng and
if you were a lay person you would look
at that string of letters and say
gosh you know three billion letters of a
human being's genome
what do i make of it i mean you know
it's like it's like a book in which you
a a language you don't understand what
has happened highlight for us what has
happened
in the and take your time to answer this
what have we learned about the human
genome since the publication of that
actg list or the actg code
um of the first of the first of the
first human being
well i think that you you you lay it out
very nicely as a 30-year
odyssey of its own like the human genome
in fact and there are and i
dip into that at various points in the
book so
there's there's one story where i dip
into the origins of where the
human reference sequence came from like
the the people who volunteered
anonymously to to give their dna to be
mixed into a
uh into a into a little pot that would
then be
spat out as you said with the as these
letters it was originally going to be
10 people uh and it turned out at the
end to be basically
two um so they and they came from
buffalo in new york
and so i dig a little bit into that
history which is as you said it's like
the early 90s
and there's some interesting little
elements that i certainly wasn't aware
of that i uncovered as a result of that
and then the pivotal moment as you said
about ten years later three billion
dollars ten years ten countries
and we have a draft sequence uh
which was just an incredible moment but
i think then everybody thought well
suddenly now there's going to be a big
change and
and in fact much of the next 10 years
was really trying to
work out do a little bit more finishing
work out what it meant
start to you know the number of genes
that were estimated at the time the
genome draft sequence came out was
something like 40 000 and if you watch
the literature every few years it drops
to where it currently has set
pretty much uh stable at that 20 000
just under
um so we spent about 10 years just
really learning about the anatomy of the
genome
and i think that the major part of this
book though is really these last 10
years which is i think when
when the genome finally became relevant
not just for science and discovery and
the fundamental nature of just knowing
the genome and understanding the letters
and
how much was made up of genes and how
much was the parts in between the genes
but but making that really relevant to
to human
medical care and so i talked about at
the very beginning of the book walking
into my colleague steve quake's office
and he'd been the fifth person in the
world he sequenced his own genome with
a technology he invented in his lab for
about 40 000
which now as you said now you can do it
for 500 so 40 000 sounds like a lot but
the one before it was 200 000 and had
taken months and months and
involved many different teams so it
really was a leap forward and
and the beginning of the book is really
where when i met him and i was in his
office and he started showing me his
genome on the screen which to me was
just
mind-blowing because we were at that
time used to sending genetic tests that
had maybe three genes or maybe eight
jeans on them and it took three months
to come back and cost five thousand
dollars and here it was somebody
you know on my on campus just down from
my office like scrolling through his
whole genome and
that was just you know an incredible
moment for me and then
when we realized that he essentially had
a pretty significant
history of heart disease in his family
including his cousin's son who died
suddenly with with no known cause
that was the moment things switched from
this is a scientific
you know incredible scientific moment to
suddenly a doctor-patient thing because
it was clear that even without his
genome he needed to come to a clinic and
be
screened given all this disease in his
family
but as as i was essentially inviting him
to my clinic it became clear
that he was also about to be the first
person to walk into a clinic basically
with his genome
and that we had no idea what we were
going to do with it you know and so
that was really the revelation that led
us this is 2009
to start to work on some computer
methods to really understand the genome
in the context
of medicine thinking like if you're a gp
with 12 minutes and you're in a world
where patients have their genomes
how do you integrate that data in a way
that's useful
in a way that can be ingested in a way
that really helps personalize the care
of that patient
and so that's the the word the world
we've in this last decade the world
we've kind of stepped along
and i think you know at the end of the
book i end up saying that i i think
after 2009 we were all like naive
thinking well in a couple of years
everyone will have their genome sequence
it really for a moment felt a bit like
that
because in the weeks and months after we
published the first paper lots of
people with access to funds were able to
get their genome sequence then they were
calling us up and saying can you help us
can you help us
but but really what happened over the
decade it took to get to this point was
the maturing of that technology we
started to
get encyclopedias of genes together
connections between genes and diseases
we began to understand the harder parts
of the genome knew what we were getting
and what we were missing
where the errors were and so that's been
a really big
process a little bit computational but
also the technology for sequencing has
improved
and that's taken us to the point where
really it's almost routine now for rare
disease to be sequencing
the genome at least in the u.s not not
everywhere yet but it's
it's essentially every day we're
ordering genome sequencing
for rare disease and then the other two
parts of it
are when you know in rare disease this
we just had rare disease day at the end
of february you know february the 28th
or 29th every year is rare disease day
and we always get a chance to remind
people that one in ten
people has a rare disease which seems
mind-blowing every time i think about it
which makes rare disease as a category
as common as diabetes
and this genome can be applied to
everyone with rare disease
but the the question then that comes up
is what about the other 9 out of 10
people when is the genome relevant for
much more broadly for cancer for
cardiovascular disease but they're
really
the big killers of our society and i
think interestingly we're just about at
that moment now we can start to sequence
at much lower depth instead of covering
the genome 40 times
we can cover it just once or twice and
use that information
to start to integrate a score that would
help us
allow us to make a much more precise
prediction of whether someone will have
a heart attack
or to put that together with certain
well-known genes that
can predispose towards cancer if they're
mutated
uh to give an overall sense of risk so
that we know what kind of screening
to apply and that day is just coming so
i think places like stanford and
and in boston uh those kind of
technologies are just becoming available
really this year
but will start to spread i think to the
rest of the world uh coming on
now so it's been a pretty amazing 20 or
30 years
so so as we i mean just to take a very
broad look at it we we started moving
from
um you know the great pioneer victor
mccusick
and others um uh pioneered
among the first rare disease clinics in
in the world
um and and this was at hopkins
and of course they didn't have access to
any of these technologies this was
this was even long before the human
genome project
but now we're moving then there was a
phase in which
you could use the genome to study uh
to find rare diseases or the mutations
that cause rare diseases
and now you're using the genome to find
uh
genes and often there are hundreds there
often may even be thousand
genes gene variants that cause common
diseases
like you know a risk a higher risk
elevated risk for breast cancer
an elevated risk of ovarian cancer and
elevated risk for
um cardiac disease etc etc um
one one uh question that um
has has often occurred to me um
not as a doctor well i i should say as
a humanist more than anything else is
that as we enter this kind of new phase
of our lives um where the genome becomes
a predictor of future disease
um what do you think that does to the
minds of people
and to um and to society in general
um i'm thinking of of this idea of of
living
under the sort of the anxious umbrella
of the genome
and and um and that anxious umbrella is
constant in other words
you know you're born and you get your
genome sequenced
and out pops a a series of diseases
uh common diseases um
i'll give you two breast cancer and the
risk of dying of uh
of a heart attack um that now you're
you're still a babe in the arms um
and yet yet you have the possibility of
knowing
a score as you call it um yeah whether
you will get this disease in your future
life
um talk to us about how to manage or
navigate that world
and how you might want to navigate that
word for your own children
yeah i think it's a revelation that was
a big part of our thinking
when we started to do this because i
think at some level understanding the
genome
was some something about telling you
something about what it meant to be
human but also something about
predicting your future and
when we first were sequencing genomes i
don't think we were very good at
predicting the future
uh but actually we now have much bigger
studies on which to base our scores
and so we we now are in the position to
apply these scores in a way that's
helpful
but i think that that while there's
clearly an element of what you describe
and for some people they will find that
they have variance in their genome of
large effect they really are somewhat
deterministic of what
something really will likely happen in
their lifetime that relates to that
finding
most of these um changes that we talk
about and it can even be up to millions
now spread across the genome that
get incorporated into a score what they
do is is change the probability they
move the needle a little bit so if you
go to your gp
and talk about your risk for heart
attack they'll ask you of course about
they'll talk about cholesterol you'll
have it measured they measure your blood
pressure talk about diabetes your
lifestyle
and all of that will get filtered into
uh into a score which is
online and available to anyone and will
come up with a 10-year risk of a heart
attack and
you know if it's above seven percent
there'll be a lot more focus on giving a
cholesterol drug for example
the thing is that we've known for years
that for heart disease half of the half
of it is nature
half is nurtured just about about those
kind of numbers it's about 50 50.
and right now actually the score we use
in the us doesn't take any account
of the of the nature part at all it's
all it's all nurture it's all about the
environment which is
is really important because those are
the things you can change
but if you really want to know what your
risk is and that's the basis in which
you're making the decision
you want to use the genomic information
too so it's a little bit more like that
number becomes more
precise instead of it being five percent
with an 80
probability or probably a bit lower it's
now
seven percent but with a 90 probability
that's the way to think about
the impact of the genome on these kinds
of diseases it's more of a probabilistic
it moves the needle a little bit
but that's not to say that as as you say
if we start to roll out
full genome sequencing even early in
life there will be people who
have a future that is change is of their
their assessment of the future will
be changed as a result of knowing that
information and that's something
in the early days we actually included
the first person i called actually after
we realized that steve quake was going
to come to the clinic
was an ethicist tank and greely who you
may know who's written very elegantly
and recently about
crispry has a book about that and
in the past about genome sequencing and
these kinds of questions so for example
something we hadn't thought a lot about
in our clinic was
if we do very targeted sequencing then
it's really mostly focused on that
individual
but for steve for example we were
looking across his whole genome
including
at genes that would cause potentially
breast cancer and might be relevant for
his daughter
so there are all those kind of questions
that also are relate to the family
aspect of genetics where we share not
just our environment but we share genes
with our family members and it's
anything that we learn as a result of or
anything i learn as a result of
sequencing my genome
is relevant for my brother for my sister
for my parents for my kids
and and how do you i mean just to push
you a little bit on that point
how do you negotiate that or what's you
have a sense of how you negotiate that
so
i mean it will soon come to a point of
time
when that information which is of course
extraordinarily private to you
because it's about your genome becomes
relevant to your sister
i've had this case many times in which
i've had a person who has
had a mutation in let's say the bracha
one gene
and i've had to have a conversation with
them uh if it's a woman
um um or a man
um you know do you wanna do you want to
talk to
talk about this with your daughters or
with your son
uh but but with the daughters is very
relevant because
obviously their risk is more immediate
the sun of course also has a risk
but that risk is passed has a risk
himself
but the risk has been then passed across
uh the next generation
um how are you negotiating this in you
know you're in your clinic you're
you're out to sequence you know some
gene that causes cardiomyopathy
and kaboom you find that someone is
bracha one positive
um what do you do how does one
negotiate that information yeah well the
first and most important thing we found
early on was to make sure that a genetic
counselor was part of every
every single interaction that we had and
so early on we actually
uh hired someone straight out of uh
genetic counseling school
who was just a perfect fit for this kind
of of position
because those are not easy conversations
to have and and the whole structure of
understanding this kind of information
at scale that's then relevant throughout
the family
is is a really a different skill set
even from the one that had been
traditionally taught and now
of course every everyone who comes out
of these schools understands
variant selection and variant curation
and understands how to deal with genome
level data but
it doesn't make the underlying question
any simpler because what we're dealing
with at the end of the day is families
and
family dynamics and in many ways these
are issues that
our family practice physicians have even
even more
um experience of than of us in super
sub-specialized care my father was a
gp uh and growing up i as a little kid i
used to to go on
house calls with him basically that was
when i before i ever knew i wanted to
to do science or uh or or do um
computers which is what drew me into the
data side of all this
uh i knew i wanted to be a doctor it was
partly because of going
with him on house calls and we'd go into
people's homes and there would usually
be at least two sometimes three
generations of
of people there and so i think that it's
not new to medicine the concept that
there's relevance
from one generation to the next whether
it's environmentally transmitted or or
genetically transmitted
but it does make for for difficult
conversations especially when these
things have to date being hidden and one
individual has decided
to shine a bright light in it i think
that's what's new
um and so we obviously have to talk
about in advance encourage them as you
did with your patient to talk to their
family members potentially in advance
and then make a decision that you hope
is the right one for the whole family
and families that come in such diverse
shapes and sizes that part of the joy of
the medicine that we
get to do is interacting with these
families and
really getting to know them all and most
families have
find that find their own way to make
this work but it's not
it's not simple um uh
you know if you don't mind i'll i'll ask
you to read a little bit from your book
because i like
um i really like it when authors read
from their
book if it's if it's okay with you i'd
like you to um
choose a passage that is interesting or
a story or
oh and then and then you know once
you're done with that tell us about
why that story is in the book and and
how
you you know thought about it yeah
yeah thanks thanks for asking and this
is actually a relatively uh
uh recent decision but i think this
little this story touches on a few of
the points that we've been making in
conversation
and has some relevance for for your part
of the world as well
i'll start actually it start before i
give you the background i'll start with
the beginning of the story and then i'll
give a little background and then i'll
read a little bit more
this is from chapter 15. river of the
land of pine trees
it was the sound it was really like an
animal sound
like a moaning and i was trying to talk
to her but there was no response
there are no words that can begin to
describe what runs through the mind of a
mother who has found her teenage
daughter blue and lifeless
lying in a pool of her own spit a few
minutes before susan graham's daughter
leilani had been a normal 13 year old
vibrant fun sporty very much like her
parents
susan's husband chris was focused on the
rising tide of personal electronics in
kids lives
and a generation growing up increasingly
sedentary
both mom and dad were active in coaching
and refereeing soccer and basketball
invested in lead by example
encouragement to be active
but there was also more direct
encouragement there was a system in the
graham household
if you want to watch tv you also run
on this particular night milani had been
working out as usual on the treadmill in
the garage
chris was out at a meeting susan was
also supposed to be out
but her plans had changed so she was
sitting at home on the sofa
the back up to the wall next to the
garage susan heard the treadmill
whirring as usual
then she heard another sound it did not
she recalled sound entirely human
but whatever it was she was clear about
one thing it was not good
she sprinted to the garage and found
lulani collapsed unconscious on the
treadmill
guttural morning emanated from her
slowly the writhing body
susan stopped the treadmill called 9-1-1
and waited leilani was breathing
but not coming around when the
paramedics arrived she was still
unconscious
could it be drugs could it be a seizure
it wasn't immediately obvious what the
problem was
but at the hospital it soon became clear
an ultrasound of her heart revealed an
abnormally thickened heart
lilani had a life-threatening genetic
heart disease of the heart muscle called
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
and that event was not a seizure but a
cardiac arrest
so this opens the chapter and tells a
little bit about the story of lulani and
then over the course of
the next few pages we talk about the
history
of the disease hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy and it's his
and the history of of bringing people
back to life using electricity
but i think the part i wanted to read a
little more of
was relating to the genome because
that's the center part of the book and
the centerpiece of our conversation
and so i'll read just another couple of
pages that relate to
how we discovered the basis of this
disease and then how we worked out in
her
case what the genetic cause was
the first clue in the hunt for the
genetic cause of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy came from an unexpected
place
next to the sweeping lush green parkland
also in southeast quebec
a few miles from the american border and
about 20 miles south of the nearest
large town in sherbrooke
is the town of kotikuk the name kotikuk
is of abunaki origin meaning
river of the land of pine trees in
french the area is known as pearl de
canton de last
because of its natural beauty but
kotikuk became known for something less
beguiling
the kodiku curse that took many of its
citizens early with strokes and sudden
death
in the fall of 1957 two brothers aged 39
and 41 originally from this town were
admitted to the royal victoria hospital
in montreal with strokes
both were found to have enlarged hearts
both also came under the care of peter
parray
a six foot four lung specialist known
for his gentle humorous teaching style
fascinated by the coincidence of strokes
and enlarged hearts and the two brothers
hurray became convinced there must be a
genetic explanation
so much so that he dedicated the next
few years of his life to understanding
the cause of the disease in the family
the brothers he learned were not alone
in total he studied 27 family members
asking many to come to the hospital for
clinical examinations
some of them several times in july 1961
he published his seminal paper
hereditary cardiovascular dysplasia a
form of familial cardiomyopathy
in which he described 20 living affected
black family members
as well as another 10 who had previously
died and even traced the origin of the
disease back to one particular immigrant
who came to quebec in 1650
in fact in the four years it took him to
complete the work five family members
died suddenly
if ever there were a family waiting for
the right genetic technology to narrow
down the cause of condition
it was this one genome scale sequencing
of course was a long way off
the human genome project wouldn't get
started for decades
but the linkage mapping technology was
invented in 1980 and it could help
with this technology and a family like
the one from the pieces were in place
and the seminal work describing the
genetic underpinnings of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy
was led by husband and wife team
christine and jonathan seidman of
harvard medical school
together with bill mckenna in london
they approached the family first
characterized by dr parry
and invited them to weekend reunions
where they could learn about the
research study and comment and consent
to join
more than 100 family members signed up
for what was to become a tour de force
of genetic discovery
the linkage mapping method was
labor-intensive but extremely powerful
so powerful in fact that the cyber
laboratory estimated odds of two billion
to one
that the gene responsible was in the
identified narrow region
given strong odds that this was the
right corner of the genome in which to
look
the team started fine mapping by
sequencing the critical genes in this
area
until they found one gene the cardiac
myosin heavy chain
part of the molecular motor of the heart
that looked to be responsible
the genetic variant was found in every
single family member with the disease
the kotiku curse turned out to be one
misspelled letter in the genome
where there was supposed to be a g there
was an eight
great um and of course it makes me think
about uh
the pioneering work done by nancy wexler
before this where they uh ultimately
mapped the
huntington's disease gene
using techniques and of course similar
techniques i should say and then
ultimately found the gene responsible
for for huntington's disease which is if
i remember correctly
the first time that someone had had
had moved this was a big team but that
uh
had moved from um you know from the uh
mr from a mysterious disease that
affected many members of a family
to the actual uh misspelling of the of
of the of the genome itself um
i think um we should move to questions
if that's uh
if that's okay and there's some other or
that already up if i i'll start asking
them
um and then you know we can go back and
forth a little bit but
um let me move to the questions um the
first question
is from someone anonymous it says
can you elaborate a little bit more
about the ethical considerations
regarding the genome
um and i suspect that they want to ask
you about
some of the things that we've been
talking about you know
you know once you know you know what are
the ethical considerations
but you know let me push that point even
a little bit further
um
it is now possible to um
um to biopsy to create a biopsy
a tiny fetus
and you can biopsy that fetus and you
can determine
whether even before that fetus is
implanted
um so this is called pre-implantation
genetic diagnosis
and you can you can get extraordinarily
detailed information about that fetus
or that i would say
uh that that collection of cells
that human being um before you implant
that into a womb
um can you envision
a future in which uh pre-implantation
genetic diagnosis
um for a disease like
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy that runs in
a family or perhaps even more something
more complicated like
bracha one etc um play a role
in in our society and and what happens
to a society
where where things um things
become uh relevant to um to
uh pgd pre-implantation genetic
diagnosis
yeah i know these are really important
and big big questions and thanks to
to whoever put the question up for for
asking
first of all i would say that in
relation to our early genomes and we
talk about this
um in a few chapters in the book when
you first realize you have this level of
information available
you need a way of first of all just
analyzing what's there and so a lot of
our work was how do we
make computers understand and how do we
have them
spit out the information we want and
prioritize it but then in that question
of priority comes our first ethical
concern because
some people might want to know
everything and the early patients that
we had were geneticists themselves who
quite literally wanted to know
everything but
most people probably do not and so we
need we needed to create a method where
people could almost like turn
turn dials for the sorts of things that
they would want to know
for example if there was a disease that
was in hidden in their genome
for which there wasn't a treatment a lot
of people didn't want to know that and
so we had to be able to
set up our tools so that that was an
option
um but if there was something that
especially if there was a fairly
straightforward
treatment that could be implemented if
they only knew they had it but we'd
otherwise cut short their life they
definitely wanted to know that
and so then trying to make decisions
about how we quantify that was hard
and so then as you talked specifically
about pgd this pre-implantation genetic
diagnosis of embryos which is a really
powerful technique and it's of course
not for everyone's very personal
decision but
for those with severe genetic disease
running in their family
combining essentially in vitro
fertilization
with the ability to do a genetic test of
the individual embryos and so the way
this would work is that there would
perhaps be if you're lucky as many as
four to eight embryos
that would each be taken to the point of
as you said being a ball of cells and
then one
cell could safely be removed from each
of the embryos and tested
and let's say you have a disease that
causes early fatality
you you can test those individual
embryos and then only implant the
embryos that are
that do not have the condition as with
most genetic diseases there's a
probability that
it's passed on and so that's that's what
pre-implantation genetic diagnosis is
and it's it's been around for
for more than 20 years although the
technology to do single cell
sequencing is is relatively recent but
be able to amplify
dna to be able to do that test that's
been around for a little while so we've
had patients in our
in our clinic over the last decade to go
through that
um i think the other part that you're i
think referring to now is
now that we can sequence a whole genome
is somebody going to suggest that we do
that at the embryo stage and what kind
of a
difficult and dangerous world would that
lead us into
if now we can have scores that predict
all sorts of things
including maybe even intelligence
whatever that means and however
anyone has decided to measure it most
people would agree that's not something
that it would be ethical to choose
embryos on the basis of
and we're at the moment of course in the
middle of a a revolution in
understanding what crispr
can do for us as opposed to what it has
done for millions of years
for bacteria um and whether it would
even be possible to
either change and gene edit
uh particularly a particularly
deleterious mutation
in an embryo back to the regular um
non-mutated form or potentially enhanced
in some way um an embryo and this of
course
has been greatly in the news um over the
course of the last two years and even
even more so with with other uh books
that are
currently uh focused on on the crispr
revolution and those stories are being
revisited right now so it's it's
clearly an area where the ethicists need
to be very deeply involved and closely
uh related to everything that's
happening um a quick question before we
go on to
some some some longer questions uh
richard zube wants to know what happened
to the girl on the treadmill
well so i yeah so um i'm tempted to say
buy the book and find out
um but uh i see and seriously
um she is she's doing really well um and
um i'm actually next month uh
having the pleasure of doing a sit down
uh like this one
uh that sid has been generous enough to
do here tonight
with her and so if you're if you'd be
interested to hear more about her story
from her
uh she is an amazing patient advocate
uh i won't tell you any more about her
medical history although it is in the
chapters in the book
for want of uh spoiling the story for
others but
uh she she's doing great and if you'd
like to see her in person then
that there's an event in about a month's
time
and you can hear some more now where's
just just give us a little bit about
where that event is and how how does one
how does one find it yeah so it's uh
uh hosted by stanford health library uh
and so
okay there is actually now uh yeah
so you can go to stanford google
stanford health library or
if you go to if you can type my name
there's a website now connected to
my name you and ashley.com that has a
list of the events on there
great um douglas peck um has been
waiting patiently he wants to know great
book by the way
one of the things that impressed me was
how collegial and cooperative other
scientists were in working together on
projects this is so unlike other
technology areas do you think this
that's true and if so why
so many companies struggle to build
teams and the ones that you describe
seem to work so well together even
when virtual is that is that true
or is that is that made up no it's it's
definitely not made up and i'm so
grateful for the question
um because actually that was one of the
things that really
inspired me to try to write this down i
would sit in these rooms with these just
unbelievably talented and smart people
and kind of i mean inside me i'm i'm the
guy who grew up in the west of scotland
who
you know still can't quite believe that
he's here
and i'm not quite believing that i'm in
the room and i look around and there's
just these these giant
minds that are coming together with this
very collaborative spirit
and that's not to say i'm not completely
naive about the world there's plenty of
competition out there and there's plenty
of times when people aren't
always acting in good faith but i feel
i've been really lucky in the people
i've been able to work with and
when i look around i see mostly that i
see mostly people
just bringing very high energy to an
idea and
and working together with other people
uh and maybe it's the
sunshine on the west coast or something
uh i know that it's it's
also the case in other parts of the
world but uh
um i i really appreciate the question
because i really
feel so excited to be in those teams and
to be able to describe them
and i think that i think it really is
like that most of the time
it really is um so a little a technical
question but maybe you can you can
unpack the words for us a little bit as
you
as you answer it um ross feldberg wants
to know can you comment on the
proportion
um
[Music]
of single gene polymorphisms with strong
effects
versus multiple gene forms each with
weak effect
and can we actually detect the latter um
yeah that's a great question and
actually it mirrors very nicely the
conversation that we've been having
where the world of whole genome genetics
has moved from being focused entirely on
rare disease and rare diseases are
almost
exclusively caused by variants of
small variants of large effects
sometimes they're big variants but in
general they're of large effect
and and so rare diseases almost by
definition are
relate to that but we all have and
usually it's a few
million when we sequence the genome we
end up with three and a half million
something like that
single nucleotide single base pair or
single letter changes
uh most of which are of pretty small
effect uh and we've really just learned
over the course of the last few years
that the answer
for that is to add them add them up and
that probably most of them have some
effect somewhere
but the effect is overall very small and
i think that overall our studies
have not been large enough until quite
recently to get our arms around those
multiple variants of small effect we
were looking at let's say the
top 50 of those variants and thinking
that's that's what we have and we didn't
we didn't want to get it wrong so we
didn't really go much beyond that but
some interesting techniques um from a
few different places including a couple
of great groups out
of boston have really looked at
so-called genome-wide scores so
really looking at taking you know five
million variants each of which has a
most of which have a very small
weighting very small weaving but
a small number of which have a larger
weighting but but taking the weightings
of all of those together
really does push up just to put it in in
real context
that score sometimes called polygenic
risk or is individually more powerful
than any
individual risk factor for heart disease
so it's more powerful than asking you
whether you smoke
more powerful and knowing your
cholesterol more powerful in knowing if
you're diabetic
individually those scores are not good
enough that they individually outperform
those individual risk factors of course
if you add all of them up together
you get the best possible uh prediction
and so that's what
increasingly we're doing and that's
we're rolling that out to stanford
there's a clinic at mgh doing that now
as well
and i think that really is the future of
bringing the nature and nurture aspects
of disease together into the best
predictor
so that we can make the best preventive
care and uh
well let's pause for a second there
because
as we get more and more refined in
defining these
polygenic risk scores which of course i
work
a little bit about with in in in the
context of cancer
you know you're you're having to make
difficult decisions how
how much how much of it is reversible do
you think i mean so
just just talk about cardiac disease can
we
um if if you get a real polygenic risk
score that shows you
that you have very high risk of cardiac
disease can we do anything about it
well traditionally the thought has been
that because it's genetic and you can't
change your genome
you're kind of stuck with that part but
the first thing to say is that
as a cardiologist everybody you know i
tell every patient they should be
exercising more and eating better and
that goes for pretty much everyone in
the world that's that you could you can
say that before
the patient even opens their mouth and i
say that to myself every morning as well
so
one of the things that that was
demonstrated though is that genetic risk
can be reduced through good diet
exercise through
lowering the other risk factors by
itself of course we'd have to be talking
about crispr and base editing g dancing
in in order to change the genome and
that is increasingly the case i don't
think we're
even remotely close to thinking about
changing thousands or hundreds of spots
in the genome we're thinking about
trying to change
one then that's a big lift but
the good news is that even if your
genetic risk is high
environmental intervention changing your
lifestyle
can reduce it significantly that part is
clear so it's it's definitely
malleable and that's the inspiration i
think for anyone out there who's
thinking that it might be a bit
fatalistic to measure this genome
uh prediction and that you can't change
it but you really can so
in fact in in the netherlands they have
some interesting work showing that
if you just tell people that they have
high cholesterol and that they should
exercise more
they do it at a certain rate but if you
explain to them through that their
genome has made them
predisposed towards a heart attack and
therefore they should exercise more they
actually
exercise at a higher rate so whether
that's a certain
amount we sometimes call that genetic
exceptionalism people treat the genetic
information differently
but in reality of course your
cholesterol and your genome probably
shouldn't be treated differently but it
turns out people really do
view it differently and often are more
adept at changing their lifestyle in
response to genetic information than
just
just other environmental information
um someone asks um are there any cases
you detail in the book that are
particularly stuck with you obviously
don't give up the
they don't don't give out spoilers but
um but
uh but is there is there is there a case
that
that particularly stuck with you don't
yeah tell us something yeah
tell us as much as you wanted to yeah
yeah
i mean i i think oh in many ways i i um
it's hard to choose because i obviously
i had to choose for the book i couldn't
you know i would have written another
two books the size with all the stories
i wanted to put in so that there was
already a little bit of a filtering but
you know one of the stories that that
really uh
is emblematic of almost everything in
the book is found in the in the middle
uh somewhere in the middle and it
relates to a little baby who first came
to our attention
when she was still in her mother's womb
and her heart rate was too low
70 beats per minute and she'd be about
140 if you're swimming about
in your mother's womb so we transferred
her to stanford children's hospital
hospital and delivered her by cesarean
section and
uh within the first day of her life the
first 24 hours of her life she had five
cardiac arrests so her heart stopped
five times
and it turned out she had a genetic
condition called long qt syndrome so
that's a condition the history of which
i describe in the book but where
basically the resetting of the heart
with each beat is prolonged and so the
next beat can't come in in time
and neither of those two things matter
much but it predisposes to this
potentially fatal rhythm and so
her case really really stuck with me for
the obvious reason that there was just
this little one who was only 37 weeks of
age including her gestation
and she'd had five cardiac arrests she
became one of the youngest babies ever
to have a defibrillator an electrical
device and which was implanted in adults
it goes under the collar bone
and in babies it goes into the abdomen
and she had that implanted
at day two i think and then we realized
though that
if we could understand the genetic basis
of her disease we could give her a
precision therapy because there's at
least two forms of this condition one
where potassium channels are affected
one where sodium channels are affected
and if you know which one
you can give the right treatment but we
didn't and the only way to find that out
was to send a test that took three
months
so we worked with illumina the company
that does sequencing and adopted their
rapid protocol to get the answer
in two or three days and managed to make
her therapy
more precise just over the course of a
weekend basically and so
that sort of story uh for me and she's
doing great now by the way i saw a
beautiful photo of her on her
five-year-old birthday just as i was
fact
checking the the book in the last stage
uh got in touch with her mom and she
sent me this amazing photo of her
blowing out the candles on her birthday
cake
and so in so many ways that is
emblematic of the stories in the book
because it
it's a patient in need it's technology
at the cutting edge it's
groups from industry and academia coming
together everyone just doing everything
they can for this little one from
pediatrics from genetics from all over
stanford from
multiple companies coming together and
being able in the end to give
information to the bedside team that
could
make her therapy more precise but what
we're calling precision medicine now
so that's one of the stories i often
think about uh as being kind of
representative of
the sorts of stories in the book um i'm
gonna take the last
two questions and actually combine them
um
and because they're very similar uh one
is from dhamma anti-gupta
and uh someone anonymous um they're
interested in computational
and computational genetics um we talked
about
polygenic risk scores um and one thing
that has struck me
as as very interesting is that the
polygenic risk scores are additive
so in the sense that you know they have
small weights
and you you add them up and when you add
them up
um you you know you get a score
but as we explore deeper computational
methods
um it might turn out that there are
non-additive
factors uh synergistic factors
where you know it's not a plus b but
it's a multiplied by b
that will give us even deeper
understanding into
the genome and of course we enter the
arena of ai
where um or machine learning where we
can use even more complex methods
to disaggregate this information
um tell us a little bit about sort of
what computational
what new computational things are
happening to
to help us understand the genome at an
even deeper level
yeah it's a great point and i think that
i mean we you talked to the beginning
about moore's law this idea that
technology moves so fast that
every 18 months the number of
transistors on an integrated circuit
doubles that was the
the idea from silicon valley in the 90s
and 2000s of just how fast technology
was moving and we applied it to the
genome and found the genome sequence
saying the cost was dropping even faster
than that
and so computation and genetics have
been really tied together since
since the onset of the genome in a way
that they weren't in the decades before
as you
described in going through the amazing
history of genetics in your
in your book um but yeah for this last
decade computation and genetics have
been inseparable and
in fact many of our genetic students now
who come to stanford for their phd are
they come because they want to do
computational genetics so
absolutely there's some very interesting
approaches of artificial intelligence of
course
you don't need to go to deep neural
networks to be able to get a major boost
in our ability to work out what's
happening with a given genome
uh through computer methods but it's
actually even more than that i think the
combination of newer technologies
improvements in our sequencing
technologies
and then improvements in in our
algorithms the computer methods
not just in speed but in accuracy our
ability to really characterize the
difficult areas of the genome both by
sequencing in different ways
uh and also having computer methods i
sometimes tell the story about the
a high schooler who's now i think he
is about to graduate from stanford but
at the time he came as a high schooler
to my lab and were part of the
undiagnosed diseases network that's part
of
the medical mysteries that are through
the book um come from this network of
doctor detectives and uh he basically
downloaded a new algorithm
basically pulled down a new algorithm
edited it somewhat
and then pulled all the unsolved cases
so this is high school kid
in the summer and he solved one of the
cases
this is a family that had been spent
months and even years with no answers
and now with the ability to think about
computers
manipulate computers someone who is very
very talented but
in high school can come along and solve
a medical mystery
and i think that's just part of the
excitement that i tried to put across
in the book that that you it's an
incredible time to be going into
genetics incredible time to combine
engineering skills like computer science
with biology skills um and just i think
a really exciting time for
for young people to think about this as
a as a potential career
great uh we are on the hour um
and uh there are no more questions um
you know i i was totally intrigued by
the book i
i loved every story in it i was you know
i'm a big fan
of uh of the of case histories um i i
wrote a piece about
we were just talking about oliver sacks
and and how um
you know um how he was a great fan of
cases trees
and what's amazing about these case
histories often um
if you look at them from victorian times
or um
or even before is that some of them have
have now years later decades later
were finding answers to these case
histories back then there were
case histories and described as you know
medical mysteries that we never
understood
a family that had you know sudden loss
of hearing
um and all of a sudden you know 50 years
later 100 years later
you figure out that that family has a
mutation in a particular gene
um we we now we you know we we you
remember
uh the history of hemophilia in the
royal family and and how
deeply it influenced uh uh human history
um and so um i just uh wanted to send
you know i i enjoyed the book i thought
it was uh
riveting to read and uh wanted to send
you a word of congratulations and
encourage people to to to to read this
book
um which you um hopefully will buy from
an independent bookstore but if not
i'm sure you can get your get your hands
uh
on the book through other sources uh any
last words erin
well just a word of thanks to you i mean
i i think your writing is
has been just such an inspiration to me
and i think uh
you know the emperor of all maladies was
it was a masterpiece and obviously i
really was excited when you wrote about
the history of genetics and so
if anyone hasn't read siddhartha's books
then
they'd need to go out and get hold of
those because
i was actually a little embarrassed
because all the books from my from my
teenage years are here but i read yours
all on my kindle so yeah
i had to put them on the back here um
but a huge fan are really grateful to
you for for the chat
this evening hopefully my pleasure here
my
thanks my pleasure kate the floor is
yours
well i'll just wrap things up thank you
tremendously ewan and sid for this
fascinating discussion
um and thank you all of you out there
for joining us tonight if you would like
to learn more
copies of the genome odyssey are for
sale on harvard.com
as well are sids books so on behalf of
harvard bookstore the harvard division
of science
and the harvard library have a good
night keep reading and please be well
everyone
thank you thank you very much